PAGE 1
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
1970, Vol. 34, No. 3, 314-318
PILOT STUDY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF SYSTEMATIC
DESENSITIZATION WITH NEUROLOGICALLY IMPAIRED
CHILDREN WITH PHOBIC DISORDERS
MARTIN OBLER AND ROBERT F. TERWILLIGER *
New School for Social Research
A modified version of Wolpe's systematic desensitization therapy involving
direct confrontation with the fear-inducing stimulus was attempted with neuro-
logically impaired children with phobic symptoms. Two hypotheses were tested:
(a) A nonverbal therapeutic technique not requiring motivation will produce
successful symptom reduction for these children, and (6) awareness of thera-
peutic procedure is not necessary for successful results. Both hypotheses were
confirmed. The implications of these results for further research on systematic
desensitization therapy were discussed.
Certain traditional psychotherapies 
have
operated on the theoretical assumption that
patient-therapist interaction is a necessary
prerequisite in the modification of undesirable
behavior (Wolberg, 1954). Elaborate verbal
exchange is assumed to be the mechanism
through which 
modification 
occurs. The
patient-therapist exchange focuses on behavior
conflicts confronting the patients from present
and past experiences. The role of the thera-
pist is crucial in accomplishing a modification
of the conflicting behavior. He uses the pa-
tient's free associations, transference projec-
tions, and countertransference responses as his
tools (Freud, 1965). Without a therapist as
an interpreter of the conflicting experiences,
modification of the undesirable behavior
would not occur.
In recent years, a large number of clinical
investigations have deviated from the assump-
tions of the above model. One method of
treatment employed by Wolpe (1958), sys-
tematic desensitization, has been effective in
reducing undesirable responses in adults
(Rachman, 1967). Recent clinical evidence
has supported its successful use with mono-
phobias (Wolpe, 1962a, 1962b), delinquency
(Zimmerman & Zimmerman, 1962), enuresis
(Lang & Melamed, 1969; Werry, 1966),
maladaptive rage and anxiety 
(Bandura,
1961), etc. Moreover, Wolpe (1962a, 1962b)
describes a treatment procedure in which a
medical student was substituted for the on-
1 Requests for reprints should be sent to Robert
Terwilliger, Graduate Faculty of Political and Social
Sciences, New School for Social Research, 66 West
12th Street, New York, New York 10011.
going therapist with no disruption occurring
in the treatment of a phobic disorder. No
apparent patient resistance occurred because
of the transfer in therapists. Lazarus and
Rachman (1957) report data indicating that
a change of therapist enhanced treatment
success by reducing the negative associations
to a particular therapist.
Systematic desensitization therapy, based
on Wolpe's reciprocal inhibition theory, re-
quires little verbal capacity or treatment
motivation.2 A short examination of the theo-
retical assumptions demonstrates the logic of
the above position. The theory assumes that
maladaptive, fearful responses may be elimi-
nated by the presentation of some other re-
sponse presumably antagonistic to the fearful
one. Whether the therapist uses muscle relaxa-
tion, classical conditioning of a neutral re-
sponse, or operant reinforcement as a pre-
sumed fear antagonist, the "counterbalancing"
principle of the therapy remains the same. By
simply developing a counteracting response to
the original fear-producing stimulus, we con-
dition a reduction in the fear response. A pa-
tient may cognitively perceive the connection
between the counteracting response and the
fear-producing stimulus, but it is not a neces-
sary requirement. With adults, Wolpe uses
muscle relaxation as the conditioned response,
but any reinforcement producing the same re-
sults could just as easily be substituted. In-
2 Wolpe has extensively developed this theory in
numerous studies he has conducted. The most elabo-
rate description of the theory remains his original
work, 
Psychotherapy 
by 
Reciprocal 
Inhibition
(19S8).
314
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PAGE 2
SYSTEMATIC DESENSITIZATION WITH PHOBIC DISORDERS
315
stead of developing a muscle relaxation sched-
ule, the therapist and patient might develop a
touch reminder schedule. Each time the
patient feels the onset of fear, he auto-
matically 
responds with the conditioned
response 
of touching himself to remind
him of the inappropriateness of this reaction.
When the original fear-producing stimulus
no longer 
elicits 
a 
fear 
response, 
the
therapy moves to a new stimulus previously
established on a hierarchy of low-intensity to
high-intensity fear responses. Relaxation or
reminder responses are thus hypothesized to
become effective in reducing the strength of
the unconditioned stimulus. Furthermore, re-
sponse generalization is hypothesized to occur
and effectively operate in the patient's real-
life situations (Wolpe, 1958).
The application of traditional therapeutic
techniques to the treatment of childhood dis-
orders has had to face the problem of the
relatively low verbal ability of children
(Freud, 1965). This has been met by vari-
ous play therapy techniques among others
(Subotnick, 1966). However, these more tra-
ditional techniques depend on attacking the
"causes" of the disorder for their effectiveness.
This approach assumes that somehow, the
child develops insight or awareness into the
nature of his problem. Furthermore, this in-
sight requires some form of transference or
intense interpersonal relationship with the
therapist (Subotnick, 1966). If the disturb-
ance becomes severe enough—as in the case
of neurological impairment—it may become
increasingly difficult to arrive at this requisite
state of awareness due to the patient's loss
of verbal and abstract ability. Thus, as Ey-
senck (1952) and Rachman (1965) have sug-
gested, there would be limits to the effective-
ness of traditionally oriented therapies in
the case of severe emotional or neurological
disturbances.
The behavior therapy techniques, rather
than attacking the presumed causes of the
disturbance, attack the symptoms themselves.
These techniques make no assumptions about
the necessity of awareness of a transference
relationship. This factor alone would suggest
the desirability of applying these techniques
to the severely disturbed child. While various
attempts have been made to apply behavior
therapy techniques to children, there have
been very few attempts to use the specific
technique of systematic desensitization de-
scribed above (Ferster & Simons, 1966;
Lovaas, Freitag, Gold, & Kassarla, 1965).
However, the literature which exists does
suggest that systematic desensitization could
be an effective technique in the treatment of
phobias in children (Jensen & Wamach,
1967; Lazarus, 
1958). Rachman 
(1965)
further points out that its use with severe
chronic and neurologically impaired persons
is limited but promising. He suggests broaden-
ing the use of systematic desensitization to
these populations.
This study was conducted to further test
the validity of applying systematic desensi-
tization to the treatment of severely dis-
turbed children, specifically to a population
hitherto unstudied—neurologically impaired
children. It would appear that systematic
desensitization, which attempts to attack
symptoms directly without requiring any great
verbal skill or abstract ability on the part
of the patient, would be very well suited to
the treatment of a population of neurologically
impaired children.
METHOD
Subject Selection
Thirty emotionally disturbed, neurologically im-
paired children were selected to participate in the
study. They were drawn from a population of
ISO children diagnosed as having minimal brain
dysfunction with severe monophobic disorder. The
monophobic disorder was one of two types: either
(a) phobia regarding the use of a public bus or (6)
phobia regarding the sight of a live dog. The Ss
having both phobias were excluded from the study.
The diagnoses were supplied by the clinic currently
servicing the children medically.3 Fifteen Ss were
selected at random for the treatment condition
(E group) and exposed to a modified version of
the Wolpe desensitization method developed by the
authors. The remaining 15 Ss served as controls
(C group) and were matched with E group Ss
for age, sex, intelligence, and phobic diagnosis. Each
E group S was matched with an individual therapist
by placing the name of all therapists in a bowl
with corresponding numbers for each S. A number
and name were selected simultaneously, with the
3 The authors wish to thank the New York Asso-
ciation for Brain Injured Children, Brooklyn Chap-
ter, for making available the Ss for the research
as well as the appropriate diagnostic material. In
addition, partial funding for the pilot study was
given through their auspices.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PAGE 3
316
MARTIN OBLER AND ROBERT F. TERWILLIGER
chosen pair remaining together throughout the 10-
week period of treatment.
Therapist Training
All IS therapists were college graduates having no
previous training or experience with neurologically
impaired children or psychotherapeutic techniques.
They were trained by the authors to apply a modified
version of the Wolpe method and were instructed
not 
to 
deviate 
from 
the 
training 
procedures
throughout the course of treatment. The training
consisted of two five-hour sessions during a two-
week period, in which they were intensively instructed
in how to dispense the rewards in attempting to
decondition the monophobia. Each therapist was
remunerated at the rate of $5 per five-hour session.
Design
Therapist and 5 met for the first time at the
initial therapy session. Each session consisted of a
five-hour weekly meeting over a 10-week period.
Treatment consisted of exposing each S to the
fear-inducing stimulus as it appeared in his everyday
life. Typically, in desensitization therapy, the pa-
tient is asked to imagine the stimulus without actu-
ally being exposed to it. The reinforcement then oc-
curs by teaching him to relax in the face of the
imagined stimulus. With the relatively nonverbal, un-
imaginative 5s, this procedure was out of the ques-
tion. The modification developed by the authors
placed S in direct confrontation with the fear-
producing stimulus, but with the therapist acting as
a buffer between the two. That is, the therapist
protected S from intense anxiety emerging from
exposure to the real phobic stimulus, and rewarded
him by approval for successful tolerance of it.
Prior to exposure to the real phobic stimulus, Ss
were asked to look at pictures or models of the
fear-inducing stimulus (bus or dog). This eliminated
the need for S to imagine the stimulus. Cooke (1966)
showed that actual exposure to the fear-inducing
stimulus was more effective than merely imagining the
stimulus. When S's behavior indicated a tolerance
of the picture or model, he was then exposed to the
actual fear-producing stimulus (bus or dog). The
therapist continuously rewarded S through encour-
agement for moving closer and closer to the object.
Eventually, Ss were able to move up the scale to
more anxiety-producing stimulus (e.g., touching the
bus or dog). At this point, S was given the option
of exposure to the stimulus without the presence
of the therapist. A new reward was offered at this
time which included toys, books, pets, and candy
chosen by 5 at an earlier session with the therapist.
These rewards were dispensed immediately at the
time of successful completion of the defined task
(e.g., talking to the bus driver, putting a token
in the box, staying in the room with a dog). If an
S overcame the phobia prior to completion of the
tenth session, he continued to be reinforced by the
therapist for his success. Successful handling of the
fear-inducing stimulus was considered to be its gen-
eralization to S's daily life without the presence of
the therapist. This was measured by a parent report
scale administered to all E and C group members
prior to and at the completion of the treatment
period.
It should be clear that the technique used in this
study differs from the traditional systematic desensi-
tization technique in four ways: (a) There is no
training in relaxation involved in this study.4 (b)
There was no attempt to ask S to develop a hier-
archy of anxiety-producing situations to then be
treated from the least to the most severe. In effect,
a hierarchy was used, but it was determined arbi-
trarily by the E. (c) It was assumed that reinforce-
ment per se was sufficient to bring about removal
of the phobic symptom. No assumption about a link
between the autonomic nervous system and relaxa-
tion was required or made, (d) 
There was no
requirement or demand made of the S to indicate
verbally the experience of lowered anxiety. Only
overt 'behavioral manifestations were used, with the
therapist making the judgment as to whether or not
anxiety had been lowered and tolerance of the fear-
producing stimulus shown.
Measurement of Treatment Success—Aware
and Unaware Subjects
As indicated earlier, the authors' contention was
that intellectual awareness of treatment procedure is
not a necessity for insuring success in treatment.
Measurement of treatment awareness, it was assumed,
might be reflected in S's IQ score (based on the
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children). An arbi-
trary cutoff point (a score of 75) was established
as the critical value. Those Ss with scores below a
75 IQ were assumed to be minimally aware of
treatment procedures, while those above 75 were
considered more likely to be aware. The assump-
tion that IQ is highly correlated with awareness was
based on the observable behavior of those Ss with
an IQ score below 75. These Ss appeared oblivious
to most stimulation in their immediate environment,
and were extremely detached and relatively indif-
ferent to the influence of others on them. The intel-
ligence test was administered to each S prior to
selection for placement in the E and C groups. Ten
E and nine C Ss scored above 75. There were,
therefore, five minimally aware E Ss and six
minimally aware C Ss (Table 1). The authors
recognize the arbitrary nature of selecting an IQ
score as a measure of treatment awareness. How-
ever, it appears reasonable that a child with an IQ
score below 75 functions on a level of very limited
awareness and could therefore be used as a standard
for a minimum likelihood of awareness of treatment
procedures.5
The basic measure for treatment effectiveness was
a parent rating scale administered to each S's parents
prior to and at the completion of treatment. The
4 This is contrary to Lament and Edwards' (1967)
rinding that relaxation training is necessary for
successfully reducing phobias.
6 The authors are currently developing a more
refined technique for determining an S's awareness
of treatment.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PAGE 4
SYSTEMATIC DESENSITIZATION WITH PHOBIC DISORDERS
317
scale consisted of 10 questions concerning the child's
functioning in society, 1 of which tapped the
critical phobic behavior. This question was as
follows:
Bus Phobia:
A. Has your child recently been able to ride a
bus? 0—No. 1—Yes, when accompanied by
another person. 2—Yes, completely on his own.
Dog Phobia:
B. Has your child recently been able to touch a
dog? 0—No. 1—Yes, with the help of another
person. 2—Yes, completely on his own.
The remaining questions dealt with S's functioning
in school, with peers, etc., and were included to pre-
vent a favorable response by parents desiring their
child's continued participation in the program. The
parents were not aware of the purpose of the re-
search and assumed that their child attended a
TABLE 1
COMPARISON OF IQ SCORES, AGE, AND PARENT RATING
J?OR TREATED AND UNTREATED SUBJECTS
TABLE 3
PROPORTION OF SUCCESS OF AT LEAST "2"
Subjects
Unaware
1
2
3
4
5
6
Aware
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Treated
Age
7-1
9-5
9-6
10-2
10-5
10-1
12-0
9-3
7-6
9-4
10-3
11-1
9-2
10-3
11-4
IQ
66
65
71
50
68
85
80
115
107
96
79
102
95
97
99
Score at
comple-
tion of
treat-
ment
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
Untreated
Age
7-3
9-3
9-8
10-7
10-5
9-3
10-0
11-9
9-3
7-8
9-6
10-6
10-7
9-4
10-5
IQ
67
68
64
73
57
60
86
81
146
106
94
81
103
96
95
Score at
comple-
tion of
treat-
ment
0
0
oj
0
0
0
0
0
01
01
0
0
TABLE 2
PROPORTION OF SUCCESS OF AT LEAST 
"1"
IQ group
Below 75
Above 75
Total
Treated
5/5
10/10
15/15
Untreated
1/6
2/9
3/15
IQ group
Below 75
Above 75
Total
Treated
3/5
5/10
8/15
Untreated
0/6
0/9
0/15
weekly recreation program. The parent rating was
used as the best measure of treatment success on
the belief that a person close to a phobic patient
is in a good position to observe any reduction
of symptoms that generalize to his daily life. All Ss
received a 0 rating on an administration of the
rating scale made prior to treatment.
RESULTS
The after-treatment measure for both
groups appears in Table 1. A score of 1 indi-
cates a reduction in the phobic system suf-
ficient to insure S's ability (as reported by
the parents) to ride a bus or touch a dog
with the help of another person. A score of 2
indicates this ability without any need for
assistance. Each S in the treated condition
(E group) received at least a "1" on his
parent's rating and in a great many cases a
"2" rating. The corresponding C group, on
the other hand, showed a disproportionately
small increase in "1" ratings and no "2"
ratings at all. Table 2 shows that the propor-
tion of successes of at least "1" for treated
Ss was significantly higher than for untreated
Ss. The critical ratio value for the difference
in proportions was 4.4 which is significant
at the .00003 level. Table 3 indicates the
proportion of successes of at least "2." The
critical ratio value for the difference in pro-
portions was 3.3 which is significant at the
,0005 level, again an indication of the supe-
riority of the treatment condition in reducing
phobic disturbances.
For behavior changes rated as "1," Table 2
indicated 100% success for both high- and
low-IQ treatment groups, thereby indicating
no difference in treatment success due to
conditions of "awareness." For rating "2,"
Table 3 yields a critical ratio of .04, further
demonstrating no difference between "aware-
ness" conditions.
DISCUSSION
The results indicate that treated Ss were
significantly affected by the modified system-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PAGE 5
318
MARTIN OBLER AND ROBERT F. TERWILLIGER
atic desensitization method. Control group 5s,
on the other hand, showed no significant
change in reduction of their phobic symptoms.
The S's intellectual ability, presumably indi-
cating the possibility of his awareness of being
treated, did not affect the results. This lack
of difference is interesting considering the fact
that severely neurologically impaired children
often receive no treatment because of their
presumed lack of motivation and concomitant
unawareness (Johnson & Myklebust, 1969).
Systematic desensitization in its modified form
appears to overcome this difficulty, at least for
children suffering from specific dog and bus
phobias.
The method of treatment employed in this
study was designed for specific phobic dis-
orders. However, its application to other
childhood disorders would be a relatively
simple task. The identification of the fear-
inducing stimulus would be followed by the
development of a hierarchy of conditions
under which the stimulus appears in the
patient's life. Fear-antagonist responses would
then be introduced conjunctively with the
appropriate reinforcement schedule. Recent
studies have demonstrated the effective use
of systematic desensitization on such disorders
as simple autism, enuresis, etc. (Jones, 1968;
Myers, 1968), in which the child is often
unable to talk about his illness.
Further research seems suggested by several
aspects of this study: (a) a comparison of
the effectiveness of trained versus untrained
therapists in the use of systematic desensitiza-
tion; 
(b) 
additional modification of the
technique as a function of the nature of the
symptoms treated, for example, possible treat-
ment of paranoid schizophrenia by exposure
to interpersonal interactions inducing suspi-
ciousness; (c) determination of what acts as
a reward in the therapeutic setting; and (d)
the assessment of 5 awareness and its neces-
sity in the successful application of systematic
desensitization.
REFERENCES
BANDURA, A, Psychotherapy as a learning process.
Psychological Bulletin, 1961, 58, 143-157.
COOKE, G. The efficacy of two desensitization pro-
cedures: An analogue study. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 1966, 4, 17-24.
EYSENCK, H. j. The effects of psychotherapy: An
evaluation. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 1952,
16, 319-324.
FERSTER, C. B., & SIMONS, J. Behavior therapy with
children. Psychological Record, 1966, 16, 65-71.
FREUD, A. Normality and pathology in childhood.
New York: International Universities Press, 196S.
JENSEN, D., & WAMACH, M. G. Operant conditioning
techniques applied in the treatment of an autistic
child. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 1967,
37, 30-34.
JOHNSON, E. J., & MYKLEBUST, H. R. Learning dis-
abilities. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1969.
JONES, H. G. The behavioral treatment of enuresis
nocturna. In H. J. Eysenck (Ed.), Behavior ther-
apy and the neuroses. New York: Pergamon Press,
1968.
LAMONT, J. F., & EDWARDS, J. The role of relaxation
in systematic desensitization. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 1967, 5, 11-25.
LANG, P. J., & MELAMED, B. G. Case report: Avoid-
ance conditioning therapy of an infant with chronic
remination vomiting. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 1969, 74, 1-9.
LAZARUS, A. A. New methods in psychotherapy: A
case study. South African Medical Journal, 1958,
33, 660-663.
LAZARUS, A. A., & RACHMAN, S. The use of system-
atic desensitization in psychotherapy. South African
Medical Journal, 1957, 31, 934-939.
LOVAAS, O. I., FREITAO, G., GOLD, V., & KASSARLA, I.
Experimental studies in childhood schizophrenia:
Analysis of self-destructive behavior. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 1965, 2, 67-84.
MYERS, V. The treatment of two phobic patients on
the basis of learning principles. In H. J. Eysenck
(Ed.), Behavior therapy and the neuroses. New
York: Pergamon Press, 1968.
RACHMAN, S. The current status of behavior therapy.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 1965, 13, 418-423.
RACHMAN, S. Systematic desensitization. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 1967, 74, 93-103.
SUBOTNICK, L. Transference in client-centered play
therapy. Psychology, 1966, 3, 2-17.
WERRY, J. The conditioning treatment of enuresis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 1966, 123, 226-
229.
WOLBERG, L. R. The technique of 
psychotherapy.
New York: Grune & Stratton, 1954.
WOLFE, J. Psychotherapy by reciprocal inhibition.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1958.
WOLPE, J. The experimental foundations of some
new therapeutic method. In A. J. Bachrach (Ed.),
Experimental foundations 
of clinical psychology.
New York: Basic Books, 1962. (a)
WOLPE, J. Isolation of a conditioning procedure as
the crucial psychotherapeutic factor: A case study.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 1962,
134, 316-329. (b)
ZIMMERMAN, E. H., & ZIMMERMAN, J. The alteration
of behavior in a special situation. Journal of Ex-
perimental Behavior, 1962, 5, 59-60.
(Received February 28, 1969)
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
