PAGE 1
NEUROLOGICAL EVALUATION OF CHILDREN WITH
LEARNING DISORDERS
By RICHARD J. SCHAIN
Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics and The Mental Retardation Program, Neuro-
psychiatric Institute UCLA Center for the Health Sciences, Los Angeles.
SCHAIN, R. J.: Neurological evaluation of children with learning disorders. Neiuropadiatrie
1 : 307—317(1970). Neurological findings in 40 children referred with the principal of complaint
of school learning problems are reviewed. Speech disorders and hyperkinetic syndromes were the
most common features of the anamnesis. The final diagnosis in these subject's were: Minimal
Brain Dysfunction (23), Behavior Disorder of Childhood (11), Mental Retardation (4), Acute
Infantile Hemiplagia (1), High Myopia (1). Seizures disorders and borderline cerebral palsy
syndromes are the most important neurological conditions to be excluded. It is believed that the
distinction between minimal brain dysfunction syndromes and behavior disorders of childhood
cannot be reliably based upon soft neurological signs, borderline EEG abnormalities or evidence
of perceptual disturbances on psychological testing.
Learning disorders 
Minimal brain dysfunction 
Neurological evaluation
Introduction
The referral of children for neuro-
logical evaluation with the principal
complaint of school learning difficul-
ties is occurring with increasing fre-
quency in pediatric neurology facilities.
These children are sent to a neurologist
because of a suspicion by parent, te-
acher, psychologist, or physician that
the child's learning difficulties are of
neurological origin. An extensive lite-
rature on "minimal brain dysfunction"
(or similar terms) as a diagnostic con-
cept applicable to many of these chil-
dren has appeared in recent years
(WORK, H. H., and HALDANE, J. E.,
1966; PINCUS, J. H., and GLASER, G.
J., 1966; SCHAIN, R. J., 1968). This
expression might be briefly defined as
a label attached to children of nor-
mal intelligence with developmen-
tal disorders of attentiveness (hyper-
kinesis), language (speech delays) and
perceptual motor functions (learning
disorders). It is generally agreed that
this expression is descriptive of sym-
ptoms with multiple determinants and
should not be regarded as a unitary
disorder (BIRCH, H. G., 1964).
In developing a neurological ap-
proach toward this problem, it must be
remembered that minimal brain dys-
Received: Oct. 6, 1969 
Accepted: Nov. 5, 1969.
Address: (R.J.S.) Department of Pediatrics, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90024.
Supported by U. S. Public Health Grant NB 05586.
307
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 2
Schain 
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1970 I Neuropldiatrie 
function is a formulation of clinicans. 
School age children are brought for 
neurological evaluation 
because 
of 
poor achievement in the classroom. It 
is the responsibility of the neurologist 
to construct a differential diagnosis 
based upon the presenting complaint 
and to rule out potential neurological 
disorders. The purpose of this report 
is to describe clinical findings in 40 
children referred to a pediatric neuro- 
logy facility with the chief complaint 
of learning problems and to outline 
a differential diagnosis in these circum- 
stances. These cases consisted of appro- 
ximately 20 O/o of all referrals during 
this time period and were exceeded in 
frequency only by seizure disorders 
indicating the common occurrence of 
this referral. 
Methods 
These 40 children vere referred over 
a two year period because of an im- 
pression by a responsible adult that 
the child's school difficulties might be 
of neurological origin. The patients 
ranged in age from 7 to 13 years of 
age with a mean age of 9.3 years. 
There were 27 males and 13 females. 
All of the group originated from 
middle to high income homes. Two 
were negro and 38 were white. Histo- 
ries were obtained and neurological 
examinations were carried out by the 
author. EEG studies and skull x-rays 
were performed on 20 subjects when 
there was a suggestion of abrupt or 
progressive behavioral changes, eviden- 
ce of focal neurological signs or a past 
history of seizures. Psychometric data 
was available on 22 of the 40 subjects. 
Results 
Anamnesis: Pertinent historical in- 
formation is summarized in Table I. 
The high incidence of speech dis- 
orders and hyperkinetic behavior is 
notable in these subjects as in most 
other studies. Hyperkinesis was judged 
to have been present if a parent belie- 
ved restless, impulsive behavior signi- 
ficantly interfered with the child's ad- 
justment at home or at school. It has 
become recognized that hyperkinetic 
behavior is not primarily a function of 
an increase of quantitative activity but 
rather with a short attention span and 
motor impulsivity which interferes 
with normal interaction of the child 
with his environment (SCHULMAN, J. 
L., et al., 1965; EISENBERG, 
L., 1964). 
Speech disturbances were usually 
described as delayed or indistinct 
speech. These speech disorders are per- 
haps best regarded as examples of arti- 
culatory 
apraxia as described by 
Table I 
Incidence of Historical Events 
Speech Disorders 
17 
Hyperkinetic syndromes 
17 
Low birth weight (under 5 l b . 4 02.) 
9 
Strabismus 
5 
Single seizures 
3 
Major perinatal abnormalities 
3 
Recurrent headaches 
2 
Cerebrovascular accidents 
1 
Meningitis 
1 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 3
Children with learning disorders 
INGRAM 
and REID (INGRAM, T. T. S., 
and REID, J. F., 1956). Many of these 
children did not manifest evidence of 
speech or motility disturbances at the 
time of examination. The parents stat- 
ed that these symptoms were present 
at an earlier ago but were no longer 
troublesome. 
Eight of the 9 low birth weight in- 
fants were between 4 and 5 I12 lbs., at 
the time of birth. The remaining pa- 
tient with a birth weight of 3 lbs., 
14 oz., was the child who received a 
primary diagnosis of high myopia. 
Five of the children manifested strabis- 
mus requiring ophthalmological atten- 
tion. In no case was the strabismus felt 
to be directly responsible for the lear- 
ning difficulties. This is in accord with 
prevailing ophthalmological views that 
the disturbances of conjugate eye mo- 
vements are not responsible for reading 
disorders 
(GOLDBERG, H. K., 
and 
DRASH, P. W., 1968). 
Examination: Neurologic examina- 
tion resulted in evidence of mild, pre- 
viously unrecognized hemiparesis in 
one child manifest by reduced muscle 
mass and weakness of dorsiflexion of 
the foot. This was the residual of an 
acute infantile hemiplegia (undiagnos- 
ed) occurring at 10 months of age. 
This was the only child in which a 
clearcut neurological disorder was evi- 
dent on physical examination. 
Ten of the children manifested evi- 
dence of speech disturbances at the 
time of examination. These were cha- 
racterized by indistinct speech, perse- 
veration and occasional alteration of 
word order which were not severe 
enough to significantly interfere with 
communication and were not regarded 
as major dysarthric disorders. 
Major EEG abnormalities consisting 
of paroxysmal polyspikes or spikes 
and wave discharges were present in 4 
patients (Figure 1). One of these chil- 
dren was hemiparetic and another was 
subject to recurrent headaches. 
None had clinical evidence of sei- 
zures at the time of examination. In 
addition, a variety of minor dysrhyth- 
mic changes (diffuse slowing, posterior 
slowing, poor organization) were often 
present but of questionable signifi- 
cance. 
Psychometric data were available on 
22 of the patients. The WECHSLER 
Intel- 
ligence Scale for Children (WISC) or 
the Stanford Binet was administered to 
all of the children tested. In this study, 
the major use of the psychometric data 
was to confirm a diagnosis of global 
mental retardation in four of the 
group (IQ 42-78). In all other sub- 
jects, the fullsacle intelligence quotient 
ranged from 82 to 123. 
Diagnosis: The final diagnoses in 
these 40 subjects are tabulated in 
Table 11. 
It should be noted that only one of 
these children manifested evidence of 
an overt cerebral palsy syndrome. One 
Table I1 Final Diagnoses in 40 children with 
the principal complaint of school learning 
problems (ages 7-13 years) 
Minimal Brain Dysfunction 
23 
Behavior Disorder of Childhood 
11 
Mental Retardation 
4 
Acute Infantile Hemiplegia 
1 
High Myopia 
1 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 4
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1970 1 NsuropZdiatris 
02 - T4 
T3 - FPl 1
T4 - FP2 
H 
50 MV 
1 SEC 
Figure 1 Seven year old girl with the principal complaint of learning difficulties in school. 
N o history of clinical seizures. Focal spike and wave discharges are seen appearing over the 
right central region 
child suffered with a high myopia of 
20 dio~ters that was responsible for 
her learning problems. Four of the 
children fell into the category of global 
mental retardation based upon evi- 
dence of significant delays in motor, 
speech, and social functions and con- 
firmed by psychometric testing. 
The remainder of the 34 patients 
were divided into two diagnostic cate- 
gories: minimal brain dysfunction or 
behavior disorders in childhood. 
The concept of minimal brain dys- 
function has often been criticized be- 
cause of the poorly defined nature of 
the syndrome and the lack of reliably 
demonstrable neurological abnormali- 
ties. Nevertheless, this concept has 
been felt to be essential in the categori- 
zation of children with learning disor- 
ders (SCHAIN, R. J., 1968). In this 
study, this diagnosis has been applied 
to children with developmental disor- 
ders in the areas of language, atten- 
tiveness, and learning in whom over- 
all intelligence is within normal limits. 
Delayed establishment of laterality 
until 5 to 6 years of age was commonly 
noted by parents. Family histories of 
similar symptoms of siblings, parents, 
or near relatives could frequently be 
elicited. Greater precision in the de- 
lineation of this syndrome does not 
appear to be possible at the present 
time. 
The diagnosis of behavior disorder 
of childhood was made in those chil- 
dren with major behavioral problems 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 5
Children with learning disorders 
Table III 
Correlation of selected historical and physical findings with major final diagnosis 
(numbers refer to number of cases) 
Minimal 
Behavior 
Mental 
Acute 
High 
Brain 
Disorder of 
Retardation 
Infantile 
Myopia 
Dysfunction 
Childhood 
Hemiplegia 
23 
11 
4 
1 
1 
(14 M-9 F) 
(9 M-2 F) 
(3 M-1 F) 
(1 M) 
(1 F) 
Speech Disorders 
8 
4 
4 
1 
Hyperkinetic 
Syndrome 
9 
6 
2 
Low Birth Weight 
7 
1 
1 
Perinatal 
Disturbances 
2 
1 
Paroxysmal EEG 
Abnormalities 
1 
.I 1 
1 
1 
Strabismus 
1 
1 
2 
1 
Recurrent head,aches 
2 
that appeared to be based upon more 
than school difficulties. Family dis- 
turbances that were obviously affect- 
ing the child were often present. The 
behavior problems were of a serious 
nature such as threatening a parent 
with a knife or expressing suicidal im- 
pulses. Stealing was a complaint of 
parents of 5 of the 11 children dia- 
gnosed in this manner. It was clear, 
however, that children categorized as 
minimal brain dysfunction also had 
behavior problems although of lesser 
degree. The issues involved in this dis- 
tinction are further discussed below. 
Correlation of certain historical and 
physical findings with the final diag- 
nosis is given in Table III. 
It is evident that speech disturbances 
and hy~erkinesis are evenly distributed 
between the groups diagnosed as be- 
havior disorder of childhood and mini- 
mal brain dysfunction. Sex ratio is 
more heavily weighted in favor of 
males in the behavior disorder group 
(4.5 : 1) than in the minimal brain 
dysfunction group (1.6 : 1). The high 
incidence of low birth weight is no- 
table in the minimal brain dysfunction 
group. 
Discussion 
The low incidence of overt neuro- 
logical abnormalities in children with 
learning disorders specifically refer- 
red for neurological consultation is 
strikingly evident. This will come as 
no surprise to those familiar with the 
characteristics of children with learning 
problems. Referral to a neurologist is 
usually motivated more by confusion 
and anxiety regarding an underachiev- 
ing child than by concern over a neuro- 
logical symptom. 
It is to be emphasized that this an- 
alysis refers to childen referred with 
the principal complaint of school le- 
arning problems. It is well known that 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 6
Schain 
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1970 1 Neurogldiatrie 
Table IV 
Neurologic Differential Diagnosis of Learning Disorders 
Conditions 
Major Findings 
Seizure disorders 
Prodongod or paroxysmal behavioral ,&smrbances 
(GOLDEN~OHN, 
E. S., and GOLD, A. P., 1960) 
Bilateral spike-wave discharges or temporal foci 
(GLASER, G. H., and GOLUB, L. M., 1955) 
Cerebral palsy syndromes (borderline) 
Hemiparesis 
(INGRAM, T. T. S., 1964) 
Ataxia 
Dyskinesias 
Diplegia 
Hemispheric brain tumors 
Focal neurological and EEG abnormalities 
Abnormal neuroradiological contrast studies 
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
Myoclonic seizures 
Rhythmic diffuse wave and spike complexes in EEG 
(BRAIN, W. R., set al., 1948) 
Juvenile cerebromacular degeneration 
Loss of visual acuity 
Speech disturbances 
Paroxysmal EEG changes 
(ELLINGSON, 
R. J., and SCHAIN, R. J., 1969) 
HUNTINGTON'S 
Chorea 
Positive family history 
Rigidity and involuntary movements 
(MARKHAM, 
C. H., and KNOX, J. W., 1965) 
learning difficulties may be associated 
with a wide variety of central nervous 
system disorders. The more important 
of these have been outlined in Table IV. 
The presence of structural brain disea- 
se is usually recognized in most of these 
disorders and the presenting com- 
plaints are rarely limited to learning 
problems. However, disturbances of 
mentation and behavior may occasion- 
ally be the sole manifestation of major 
neurological disorders. Any evidence 
of recent alterations of behavior or of 
unusual 
progression 
of 
symptoms 
should be regarded with suspicion. The 
resemblance of the symptoms of GERST- 
MANN'S syndrome' with some of the 
problems of children with learning dis- 
orders (HERMANN, 
K., and NORRIE, E., 
1958) may serve as a reminder that 
spatial and sequential disorientations 
interfering with school performance 
may result from cerebral lesions. 
The occurrence of EEGs with major 
epileptiform abnormalities is not an 
uncommon finding in children with 
minimal brain dysfunction (PAINE, R. 
S., 1962; CAPUTE, A. J., et al., 1968) 
(5-10°/o). This was also true in this 
study as 4 of the cases manifested pa- 
roxysmal disturbances in their EEG 
(Table 111). PAINE regarded this find- 
ing as a borderline manifestation of a 
seizure disorder (PAINE, R. S., 1962). 
' Gerstmann's syndrome - Finger agnosia, right-left 
disorientation, dysgraphia and dyscalculia associated 
with a tumor involving the angular gyrus of the 
parietal lobe of the dominant hemisphere (Gerstmann, 
J., 1940). 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 7
Children with learning disorders 
The detection of this type of EEG pat- 
tern indicates the need for a careful 
analysis of the child's behavior focus- 
sing on a search for seizure phenomena 
such as brief alterations of conscious- 
ness, lipsmacking, chewing movements, 
disorientations or other behavioral 
automatisms (GOLDENSOHN, 
E. S., and 
GOLD, A. P., 1960; GLASER, G. H., 
and DIXON, M. S., 1956). However, 
clinical evidence of seizure states are 
rarely found in these children, even 
those with paroxysmal EEG distur- 
bances. The significance of EEG find- 
ings of this type in children with learn- 
ing disorders is yet to be determined 
but may well adversely affect cogni- 
tive functions. 
Having excluded major neurological 
syndroms, the pediatric neurologist is 
faced with the task of formulating a 
diagnosis and set of recommendations 
for the bulk of children who do not fit 
into well-defined syndromes. The re- 
cognition of borderline mental retarda- 
tion, regardless of etiology, is impor- 
tant because of its educational and 
social implications. Ten percent of the 
present series fell into the category of 
mental retardation. Reliance on ab- 
breviated office testing for diagnostic 
appraisal is often quite deceptive. The 
developmental history may give a bet- 
ter index as to overall mental func- 
tions, but must be supplemented by 
formal psychometric testing whenever 
a question of mental retardation arises. 
The WISC or Stanford Binet are 
usually adequate for this purpose. 
The most difficult aspect of an eva- 
luation consists of distinguishing be- 
tween minimal brain dysfunction syn- 
dromes and behavior disorders of 
childhood. This corresponds to the 
categories of primary reading retarda- 
tion (developmental dyslexia) and se- 
condary reading retardation 
(exo- 
genous factors such as anxiety or poor 
schooling) developed by RABINOWITCH 
and coworkers (RABINOWITCH, 
R. D., 
et al., 1954). "Soft" neurological signs 
such as clumsiness, choreiform move- 
ments, dysdiadochokinesis, mixed late- 
rality, synkinesias, motor impersistence 
and others have been regarded as evi- 
dence of subtle disturbances of brain 
function by many authors (SCHAIN, 
R. J., 1968). This concept was first 
advanced by BENDER in her studies of 
severely disturbed children diagnosed 
as childhood schizophrenia (BENDER, 
L., 1947). Borderline EEG abnormali- 
ties are often used to reinforce this 
concept. From the psychometric side, 
scatter in subtest scores of the WISC 
or Stanford Binet and evidence of spa- 
tial confusions in the B E N D E R G ~ s ~ ~ ~ ~
or 
Goodenough Draw A Person test have 
been interpreted to indicate cerebral 
damage. However, careful analysis of 
the use of most of these approaches re- 
veal that they cannot be relied upon 
to distinguish poor performance due to 
adverse environmental factors and 
cerebral dysfunction of endogenous 
origin (SCHULMAN, 
J. E., et al., 1965; 
HERBERT, 
M., 1964; PAINE, R. S., et 
al., 1968). Normative data for most of 
the soft neurological signs is lacking. 
The standard intelligence tests such as 
the WISC or Stanford Binet were 
originally developed for the measure- 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 8
Schain 
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1970 1 Neuropidiatrir 
ment of general intellectual function- 
ing. They are still best utilized as diag- 
nostic instruments for this purpose. 
Definite evidence of early develop- 
mental disturbances might be regarded 
as more indicative of cerebral dys- 
function (or maturational lag) than 
neurological abnormalities of dubious 
reliability. In this regard, it is of inter- 
est that speech disorders and hyper- 
kinesis appears with approximately 
equal frequency in both the behavior 
disorder of childhood and minimal 
brain dysfunction groups. It must be 
concluded that the distinction between 
these two categories in children with 
learning disorders is largely based upon 
the presence or absence of serious be- 
havior problems in the affected child. 
All studies of children with behavior 
disorders indicate a male preponder- 
ance of 3 to 4 : 1 or higher (BAHN, A. 
et al., 1961; BENTZEN, F., 1963). In 
this study, in which an effort was made 
to separate psychogenic behavior pro- 
blems from minimal brain dysfunction, 
the incidence was only 1.6 : 1 in favor 
of males in the latter group as compar- 
ed to 4.5 :I in the presumed psycho- 
genic group. HALLGREN'S 
(HALLGREN, 
B., 1950) monumental study in this 
area reported investigations on 112 
cases of "specific dyslexia" and 160 
secondary cases (sibs and parents of 
probands). This is virtually the only 
report in which test procedures were 
administered to entire families. The in- 
cidence of dyslexia in males, as usual, 
was higher than in females in primary 
cases but was almost equally distribut- 
ed among the sexes in the secondary 
cases. HALLGREN 
concluded that fac- 
tors extraneous to genetically deter- 
mined learning difficulties may explain 
the male preponderance. It may be 
that behavioral reactions to the frus- 
trations produced by learning diffi- 
culties are the sex-linked aspect of the 
problem. 
The terminology of minimal brain 
dysfunction is a continuing problem. 
Table V summarizes the more histori- 
cally important terms that may be re- 
garded as equivalent. The evidence 
that dyslexia and its synonyms as com- 
monly used refer to the same popula- 
tion as those labelled by others as mini- 
mal brain dysfunction syndromes has 
been previously reviewed (SCHAIN, R. 
J., 1968). Most recently, MACKEITH 
(MACKEITH, R., 1968) has proposed 
the expression Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders as a generic term to charac- 
terize these disorders. This is an espe- 
Table V Some Equivalents of the Minimal Brain Dysfunction Syndrome 
Minimal Cerebral Dysfunction 
Developmental Gerstmann's syndrome 
Minimal Chronic Brain Syndromes 
Developmental aphasia 
Minimal Brain Damage 
Specific Reading Disability 
Clumsy Child Syndrome 
Congenital Word Blindness 
Visual Motor Disability 
Specific Language Disability 
Hyperkinetic Behavior Syndrome 
Strephosymbolia 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
Developmental Dyslexia 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 9
Children with learning disorders 
cially appropriate term, which, to pa- 
raphrase an expression of HALLGREN 
quoted by SILVER and HAGIN 
(1960) in 
another context, is "suitable obscure, 
sufficiently descriptive and devoid of 
theoretical implications". 
Socioeconomic factors have not been 
included in this discussion because of 
the particular origins of the study 
group. Children from depressed urban 
or rural areas present a major problem 
in consideration of the epidemiology 
of learning problems (EISENBERG, 
L., 
1966). Any comprehensive approach to 
children with learning disorders must 
- 
include cultural and educational fac- 
tors in addition to the issues discussed 
above. 
The management of children with 
learning disorders is a function of the 
final diagnostic formulation. This re- 
quires co-operation with a variety of 
other professionals, especially in the 
area of special education and family 
counselling. Neurological aspects of 
therapy will primarily be concerned 
with the use of drugs in the control of 
hyperkinesis and improvement of at- 
tention span. Barbiturates should not 
be used as paradoxical reactions in the 
form of excessive irritability and in- 
creased activity frequently occur. Dex- 
troemphetamine (5-30 mgm./day) and 
Methylphenidate (10-80 
mgm./day) 
have been extensively used to control 
hyperkinesis 
(EISENBERG, L., 
1966 5 
WERRY, J. S., 1968). These drugs 
should be administered in the same 
manner as anticonvulsants by gradual- 
ly increasing dosage until an adequate 
response or an adverse reaction occurs. 
Most of the children with the hyper- 
kinetic syndrome manifested improve- 
ment in this aspect of their behavior at 
the time of examination. The tendency 
of hyperkinesis to lessen with age is 
well known although this is not neces- 
sarily 
true 
of 
social 
adjustment 
(WERRY, J. S., 1968). One might spe- 
culate that distractibility might have 
interfered with the establishment of 
learning and social patterns at a criti- 
cal stage of development during the 
preschool years. The maximum value 
of drug treatment of the hyperkinetic 
syndrome may lie in its use prior to the 
time when a learning disorder has be- 
come evident. 
The question of the use of anti- 
convulsant medications in children 
with epileptiform EEG abnormalities 
will frequently arise. The literature is 
not encouraging as to the usefulness of 
treatment of the EEG in this manner 
(PINCUS, J. H., and GLASER, G. J., 
1966). However, when definite epilep- 
tiform features in the form of poly- 
spikes or spike and wave discharges are 
present, a trial of primadone or di- 
phenylhydantoin may be warranted. 
Finally, the pediatric neurologist 
will recognize that certain parents 
have a persistent belief that there 
should be a medical solution to their 
child's learning problems. This may be 
reinforced by a wish to avoid recogni- 
tion of factors in the home adversely 
affecting the child. An important pur- 
pose of the neurological evaluation is 
to clearly rule out known neurological 
disorders in order to provide a basis 
for subsequent counselling. When ne- 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 10
Schain 
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1970 1 Neuropldiatrie 
cessary, the parents should be encour- 
logischen Krankheiten die bei Kindern 
aged to obtain help for the resolution 
n i t Lernschwierigkeiten auszuschliei3en 
of family difficulties that appear to be 
sind. 
Raumfordernde 
intrakraniale 
a significant factor in their child's 
Prozesse und degenerative Erkrankun- 
learning disorder. 
gen des Zentralner~ens~stems 
sollten 
ebenfalls rnit in differentialdiagnosti- 
Zusammenf assung 
sche Oberlegungen eingeschlossen wer- 
- 
Es wird iiber die Ergebnisse einer 
neurologischen Untersuchung bei 40 
Kindern berichtet, die primSr wegen 
Lernschwierigkeiten uberwiesen wor- 
den waren. Sprachstorungen und Hy- 
peraktivitat waren in der Anamnese 
am haufigsten zu finden. Bei einem 
Kind lag auflerdem eine Hemiparese 
vor. Bei 4 der untersuchten Kinder 
konnten deutlich EEG-Veranderungen 
gefunden werden, die sich als paroxys- 
me11 auftretende Spike-Entladungen 
manifestierten. Die 40 Kinder konnten 
der neurologischen Diagnose nach in 5 
Gruppen unterteilt werden: 
Diskrete Hirnfunktionsstorungen 
(minimal brain dysfunction syn- 
drome) : 23 
Verhaltensstorungen : 11 
Retardierte geistige Entwicklung : 4 
Akute fruhkindliche Hemiplegie : 1 
Schwere Myopie : 1 
Die Knaben iiberwogen in der Grup- 
pe der Verhaltensstorungen (4,5 : I), 
nicht aber in der Gruppe rnit diskreten 
Storungen der Hirnfunktion (1,6 : 1). 
In der Tabelle IV wurden die aus neu- 
rologischer Sicht wichtigsten differen- 
tialdiagnostischen Gesichtspunkte zu- 
sammengefai3t, die bei Kindern rnit 
Lernschwierigkeiten mit in Erwagung 
zu ziehen sind. Krampfleiden und 
Schwachform eines zerebralparetischen 
Syndroms sind die wichtigsten neuro- 
den, obwohl Lernschwierigkeiten eher 
selten als ein Hauptsymptom solcher 
Grundkrankheiten beobachtet werden. 
Eine zuverlassige Trennung zwi- 
schen einer diskreten Hirnfunktions- 
storung (minimal brain dysfunction 
syndrome) und einer Verhaltensstorung 
ist rnit Hilfe ,,weicherC' neurologischer 
Symptome, rnit Grenzbefunden im 
EEG und rnit den Befunden einer Per- 
zeptionsstorung nicht moglich. 
Die offensichtliche Knabenwendig- 
keit der Verhaltensstorungen bei Lern- 
schwierigkeiten konnte durch die be- 
sondere Verhaltensreaktion der Kna- 
ben begriindet sein, rnit der diese auf 
die Lernschwierigkeiten und deren Fol- 
gen reagieren. Der Behandlung einer 
diskreten Hirnfunktionsstorung liegt 
die pharmakologische Beeinflussung des 
Hyperaktivitats-Syndroms zugrunde. 
Aui3erdem sollten Kinder mit epilepti- 
formen EEG-Ver3nderungen antikon- 
vulsiv behandelt werden. Kinder, bei 
denen eine Storung durch die Situation 
innerhalb der Familie wahrscheinlich 
gemacht werden kann, sollten auch von 
psychologischer Seite Hilfe erfahren. 
References 
BAHN, A., CHANDLER, 
C., and EISENBERG, 
L.: Diagnostic and demographic characteristics 
of patients seen in outpatient clinics for an 
entire state. Amer. J. Psychiat. 117, 769 (1961) 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.

PAGE 11
Children with learning disorders 
- BENDER, L.: Clinical study of one hundred 
schizophrenic children. Amer. J. Orthops~chiat. 
17, 40 (1947) - BENTZEN, F.: Sex ratios in 
learning and behavior disorders. Amer. J. 
Orth~ps~chiat. 
33, 92 (1963) - BIRCH, H. G.: 
The Problem of "Brain Damage" in children. 
In Brain Damage in Children. Ed. H. G. 
BIRCH. Wi~lli,ams & Mil~kims Co., Bduirnore, 
Md. 11, 3-12 (1964) - BRAIN, W. R., GREEN- 
FIELD, J. G., and RUSSELL, 0. S.: Subacute in- 
clusion body encephalitis (Dawson type). 
Brain 71, 365 (1948) - CAPUTE, A. J., NIE- 
DERMEYER, E. F. L., and RICHARDSON, 
F.: The 
electroencephalogram in children with mini- 
m d ccrebrd dysfiunction. Pdliatrics 41, 1104 
(1968) - EISENBERG, 
L.: The epidemiology of 
reading retardation and a program for pre- 
ventive intervention. In The Disabled Reader. 
Ed. J. MONEY. The John Horpkins Press: Bal- 
timore, 1966a, pp 3-19 - EISENBERG, 
L.: The 
management of the hyperkinetic child. Dc- 
velop. Med. Child. Neurol. 8, 593 (1966 b) - 
EISENBERG, L.: Bchavioral manifestations of 
cerebral damage in childhood. In Brain Dar- 
age in Children. Eld. H. G. BIRCH. Willliams & 
Wilkins: Baltin~orc, Md. 1964, pp 61-73 - 
ELLINGSON, R. J., and SCHAIN, R. J.: EEG 
patterns in juvenile cerebral lipidosis. EEG 
clin. Neurophysiol. 27, 191 (1969) - GERST- 
MANN, J.: Syndrome of finger agnosia, dis- 
orientation for right and left, agraphia and 
acalculia. Arch. Neurol Psychiat. 44, 393 
(1940) - GLASER, G. H., and DIXON, M. S.: 
Psychomotor Seizures in Childhood. Neuro- 
logy 6, 646 (1956) - GLASER, G. H., and 
GOLUB, L. M.: The electroencephalogram of 
psychomotor seizures in childhood. EEG clin. 
Neurophysiol. 7, 329 (1955) - GOLDBERG, 
H . 
K., and DRASH, P. W.: The Id,i~sabled rc,ader. 
J. Pediat. Opthalmol. 5, 11 (1968) - GOLDEN- 
SOHN, E. S., and GOLD, A. P.: Prolonged be- 
havioral disturbances as ictal phenomena. 
Neurology 10, 1 (1960) - HALLGREN, 
B.: Spe- 
cific dyslexia (congenital word-blindness). A 
clinical and genetic study. Acta psychiat. et 
neurol. scand. Suppl. 65, (1950) - HERBERT, 
M.: The concept and testing of brain damage 
in children: A review. J. Child. Psychol. 
Ps~chiat. 5, 197 (1964) - HERMANN, 
K., and 
NORRIE, E.: IS congenital word-blindness a 
hereditary type of Gerstmann's 
syndrome? 
Psychiat. Neurol. (Basel) 136, 59 (1958) - 
XNGRAM, 
T. T. S.: Paediatric Aspects of Cere- 
bral Palsy. E. & S. Livingstone, LTD., Edin- 
burgh. 1964 - INGRAM, 
T. T. S., and REID, J. 
F.: Developmental aphasia obseried in a de- 
pnrtmen~t of chilltd psychisatry. Arch. Dis. Childh. 
31, 161 (1956) - MACKEITH, R.: Maximal 
clarity on neurodcvelopmental disorders. De- 
velop. Med. Child. Neurol. 10, 143 (1968) - 
MARKHAM, 
C. H., and KNOX, J. W.: Obscr- 
vations on Huntington's Chorea in Childhood. 
J. Pedi,at. 67, 46 (1965) - PAINE, R. S., WERRY, 
J. S., and QUAY, H. C.: A study of "minimal 
brain dysfunction". 
Develop. Med. Child 
Neurol. 10, 505 (1968) - PAINE, R. S.: Mini- 
mal chronic brain syndromes in children. De- 
velop. Med. Child. Neurol. 4, 21 (1962) - 
PINCUS, J. H., and GLASER, G. J.: The syn- 
drome of "Minimal Brain Damage" in child- 
hood. New Eng. J. Med. 275, 27 (1966) - 
RABINOWITCH, 
R. D., DREW, A. L., DE JONG. 
R. N., INGRAM, W., and WITHEY, L.: A re- 
sea'rch appro,ach to reading retarchion. R.es. 
Publ. Assn. Res. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 34, 363 
(1954) - SCHAIN, R. J.: Minimal Brain Dys- 
function in Children: A Neurological View- 
point. Bull. Los Angeles Neurol. Soc. 33, 145 
(1968) - SCHULMAN, J. L., KASPAR, J. C., 
THRONE, F. M.: Brai'n Damage an,d Eehavior. 
A 
climical-experi.m.enta1 st,ujdy. Charles C. 
Thomas: Springfield, 1965 - SILVER, A. A,, 
and HAGIN, R.: Specific reading disability: 
delination of the syndrome and relation to 
cerebral dominance. Comprehensive Psychiat. 
1, 126 (1960) - WERRY, J. S.: Developmental 
Hyperactivity. Pediatric Clinics of North 
America. 15, 581-599 (1968) -WORK, H. H., 
and HAIDANE, J. E.: Cerebral dysfunction in 
children. Amer. J. Dis. Child. 11, 573 (1966). 
Downloaded by: IP-Proxy NERL (SUNY_Stony_Brook), Stony Brook University Libraries. Copyrighted material.
